
Slide 2: VB: We need to get from 51B tons of CO2e to 0 (annually), to make headway in our current problem. 
There's tons of information to share and discuss around this but starting point: 
If we have an unsustainable level of climate change, then no matter how we slice it, we can't keep adding 
green house gases to the atmosphere, hence we need to get this number of annual emissions down to 0.


Slide 3: VB: Depending on which sources you consult, and how you categorize, this image will look different.
But the gist of it is Making things, how we plug in, how we grow things/food, how we get around, and how 
we stay warm and cool. Source: Bill Gates, how to avoid a climate disaster


Slide 4: VB: Let’s look closer at one quite unknown environmental challenge of today. 
The global data center challenge is to meet the ever-growing demand for data storage and processing while 
also reducing the environmental impact. Data centers are a major consumer of energy, and they are responsible 
for a significant amount of greenhouse gas emissions. As the amount of data that is generated and stored 
continues to grow, the challenge of operating data centers in a sustainable way will become even more pressing.

WM: Some of the key challenges facing the global data center industry include:

- Power consumption: Data centers are a major consumer of energy, and they are responsible for about 2% of 
global electricity consumption. This is expected to increase to 8% by 2030.

- Cooling: Data centers generate a lot of heat, and this heat needs to be removed in order to keep the equipment 
running properly. The cooling process can consume a significant amount of energy.

- Water usage: Data centers require a lot of water for cooling and other purposes. The water usage can put a 
strain on local water resources, especially in arid areas.

VB: The global data center industry is facing challenges, but there are also opportunities. 
In this presentation we will look closer at how using Cloud data centers can help to address the global 
data center challenge, through use of:  

- More efficient cooling systems: New cooling systems are being developed that use less energy and water. 
For example, liquid immersion cooling systems submerge servers in a non-conductive liquid that helps to transfer 
heat away from the equipment.

- Renewable energy: Data centers are increasingly using renewable energy sources such as solar and wind power. 
This helps to reduce their reliance on fossil fuels and their environmental impact.

- Edge computing: Edge computing is a distributed computing paradigm that brings data processing and storage closer 
to the end user. This can help to reduce the amount of data that needs to be sent to centralized data centers, 
which can save energy.

- Artificial intelligence (AI): AI is being used to improve the efficiency and sustainability of data centers. 
For example, AI can be used to optimize cooling systems and power usage.


Slide 5: WM: Before we look at how cloud computing helps to solve the global data center challenge, let’s first 
reiterate what cloud computing is. 

Cloud computing is a way of delivering computing services, such as servers, storage, databases, networking, software, 
analytics, and artificial intelligence over the internet. A good way to grasp what cloud computing is through the 
the five essential characteristics of cloud computing, as defined by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).

VB: The five characteristics are:

On-demand self-service: Cloud users can provision computing resources (e.g., servers, storage, networking, and 
applications) as needed, with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.

Broad network access: Cloud resources are available over the network and accessible to authorized users from 
anywhere

Resource pooling: The cloud provider's resources are pooled to serve multiple consumers using a multi-tenant model, 
with different physical and virtual resources dynamically assigned and reassigned according to demand. 

Rapid elasticity: Cloud resources can be provisioned and released rapidly, with minimal management effort or 
service provider interaction. 

Measured service: Cloud users pay for the cloud resources they consume, typically measured in terms of CPU usage, 
memory, storage, and network bandwidth.

WM: These five characteristics of cloud computing offer a number of benefits to cloud users, including:

Cost savings: Cloud users can save money on IT infrastructure costs by using cloud computing. This is because cloud 
providers can achieve economies of scale and pass on the savings to users.

Scalability: Cloud users can easily scale their computing resources up or down as needed. This is useful for applications 
that have fluctuating workloads.

Reliability: Cloud providers have a high level of redundancy and availability. This means that cloud users can be 
confident that their applications will be available when they need them.

Security: Cloud providers use a variety of security measures to protect their data centers. This helps to protect 
cloud users' data from unauthorized access

Ease of use: Cloud computing is easy to use. There is no need to purchase or maintain IT infrastructure, and users 
can access their applications from anywhere with an internet connection.


Slide 6: VB: So, how does cloud computing help us reduce our energy consumption? 

WM: There are a few ways.

Through the nature of their operations, Cloud providers easily achieve economies of scale. Taking Google as an example, 
they have 7 products with 1B users each. That sort of global scale requires processing and storage on a mind blowing 
scale. Cloud providers build and operate much larger data centers than most businesses can afford to do on their own. 
This allows them to use more efficient cooling and power systems. Cloud providers adapt more easily and quickly their 
resources to meet demand. This means that they don't have to keep as much idle capacity as traditional data centers. 
Idle capacity is a major source of energy waste in IT. Cloud providers increasingly use using renewable energy sources 
to power their data centers. This is good for the environment, and it can also save money.


Slide 7: WM: Let’s look a bit closer at the differences between Cloud and on-premise data centers. 
Cloud data centers are typically more energy efficient than traditional on-premises data centers. 

A study by the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory found that cloud data centers are about 30% more energy efficient 
than traditional on-premises data centers. This is because cloud providers can take advantage of economies of scale and 
use more efficient cooling and power systems. 

The big cloud data centers use tailored chips, high-density storage, virtual-machine software, ultrafast networking and 
customized airflow systems — all to increase computing firepower with the least electricity.

VB: Cloud providers can more easily and quickly adapt their resources to meet demand. 

This means that they don't have to keep as much idle capacity as traditional data centers. Idle capacity is a major 
source of energy waste in IT. 

A study by the Uptime Institute found that cloud providers can reduce their energy consumption by up to 50% by dynamically 
adjusting their resources to meet demand. On average cloud providers that use dynamic resource adjustment reduce their 
energy consumption by 30%. 

WM: Cloud providers are increasingly using renewable energy sources to power their data centers. This is good for the 
environment, and it can also save money. A study by the World Economic Forum found that cloud providers could reduce 
their carbon emissions by up to 80% by using 100% renewable energy.

VB: In addition to these scientific backings, there are a number of other reasons why cloud computing is more energy 
efficient than traditional on-premises IT infrastructure. For example, cloud providers can use more efficient cooling
systems, such as evaporative cooling and free cooling. They can also use more efficient power systems, such as 
power-over-Ethernet (PoE) and uninterruptible power supplies (UPSs).

WM: There are a few other ways that cloud computing can help to reduce environmental impact. 
For example, cloud computing can help to reduce the amount of e-waste generated. This is because cloud providers can 
often reuse and recycle hardware components, which reduces the need to purchase new hardware. 

Cloud computing can also help to reduce the amount of traffic on the internet. This is because cloud providers can host 
applications and data closer to users, which reduces the amount of data that needs to be transferred over the internet.

VB: I think it’s safe to say that the scientific evidence shows that cloud computing is a more energy efficient way to 
deliver IT services. 


Slide 8: VB:
Companies with average on-premise to cloud migrations can drive 65% energy reduction and carbon emission reduction of 84%.

Companies can reduce application energy consumption by up to 50x when selecting the appropriate programming language for the task.

Companies can stretch carbon emission reductions to 98% by configuring applications for the cloud.

WM: IaaS migrations involve migrating applications from enterprise owned to cloud without major redesigns of applications 
or workflows. These basic cloud-first journeys pave the way for significant carbon reduction opportunities. The main drivers 
of IaaS include better power and cooling improvements that allow for less energy per compute unit, newer and more efficient 
hardware optimized by cloud providers, and server utilization rates several times greater than typical enterprise-owned rates. 
In most cases, cloud providers also have greater renewable energy mixes than traditional data centers and minimize data center 
carbon footprints through renewable energy. Our analysis of the largest public cloud service providers shows average 
enterprise-owned-to-cloud migrations can lead to an impressive 65% energy reduction and 84% carbon reduction.

Sustainable software development approaches deliver even more improvements. Companies must make intentional choices to consider 
cost and performance in the context of sustainability outcomes. For example, our experiments indicate that selecting the right 
“fit-for-purpose” coding language can reduce energy consumption. Maintaining balance between accuracy of analytical models and 
cloud resource consumption can result in significant savings. Accenture Labs’ research in sustainable software engineering 
revealed that for certain types of programming techniques, the choice of coding language can impact energy consumption by as 
much as 50 times. In dealing with AI, which is typically hosted on the cloud, choices related to accuracy can also make a big 
difference in energy use. Consider this: Accenture found that while training a simple AI model for identifying flowers, 
increasing model accuracy from 96% to 98% resulted in a nearly 7X jump in energy consumption.

Sustainable software engineering practices drive energy and carbon reductions. But with limited resources, companies need to 
prioritize which applications will deliver the biggest carbon benefit when it comes to sustainable development efforts. What’s 
also important: executives should back sustainability as an outcome for optimizing software, shifting away from their 
traditional focus on performance and cost reduction.

Companies drive even greater carbon reductions through cloud-native architectures and deployments. Customizing applications 
to be cloud-native can stretch carbon emission reduction to 98%. Customization requires designing applications to take full 
advantage of on-demand computing, higher asset utilization rates, and dynamic allocation of computing resources. For 
applications that are not fully migrated, companies can use digital decoupling to take the core parts of legacy applications 
and build efficient cloud architecture around them.


Slide 11: WM: Now, all of this is about infrastructure and hardware. Isn’t there something called Green Coding / Programming? 
Is that easier in the Cloud? 

VB: Yes, green programming is easier in the cloud. This is because cloud providers offer a number of features that can help 
developers to write more efficient code. 

For example, cloud providers can provide developers with metrics on their code's energy consumption. 

This can help developers to identify areas where their code can be improved. 

Cloud providers can also offer developers tools that can help them to optimize their code for energy efficiency.

WM: Right. I guess in addition to the features offered by cloud providers, green programming would also be easier in the cloud 
because of the way that cloud computing works.

In a cloud environment, developers only pay for the resources that they use. 

This means that developers have additional incentives to write efficient code, as they will only be charged for the resources 
that their code actually uses.

Here are some specific examples of how green programming can be easier in the cloud:

Cloud providers can provide developers with metrics on their code's energy consumption. This can help developers to identify areas 
where their code can be improved. For example, Amazon Web Services (AWS) offers a service called CloudWatch that provides developers
with metrics on their code's energy consumption.

Cloud providers can offer developers tools that can help them to optimize their code for energy efficiency. For example, 
Google Cloud Platform (GCP) offers a tool called App Engine that can help developers to optimize their code for energy efficiency.

In a cloud environment, developers only pay for the resources that they use. This means that developers have an incentive to write 
efficient code, as they will only be charged for the resources that their code actually uses.


Slide 14: WM: Recently I noticed Energy Saving Recommendations on my Windows 11 laptop. 

How you configure settings on your Windows 11 device influences power consumption, battery life, and the carbon emissions that occur 
from electricity generation. 

Energy recommendations collects settings that have an outsized impact on power consumption in one single place, making it easy to 
reduce your power consumption and improve battery life.

You will see different items on the Energy recommendations settings page depending on the type of Windows device you have, whether 
it is plugged into the wall for power, or running on battery.


Slide 15: WM: I guess its a wrap. Thank you all for listening in and hope you learnt something you didnt know today.

VB: its been a pleasure to hold this presentation. For those interested there are further links and resources in this presentation 
that you can follow if you want to learn more about this important topic.

WM & VB: Thanks and see you in the Cloud! 
